# Project: Data Modeling with Postgres

## Introduction

A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

The objective is to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis,
as well as an ETL pipeline that transfers the data from the JSON logs into the database, such that the
analytics team can run queries on it.

## Schema for Song Play Analysis

Using the song and log datasets, we'll create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

### Fact Table

1. songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong

   - songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

### Dimension Tables

2. users - users in the app

   - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level

3. songs - songs in music database

   - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration

4. artists - artists in music database

   - artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude

5. time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units

   - start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

## Datasets

### Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```bash
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```json
{
  "num_songs": 1,
  "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7",
  "artist_latitude": null,
  "artist_longitude": null,
  "artist_location": "",
  "artist_name": "Line Renaud",
  "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1",
  "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff",
  "duration": 152.92036,
  "year": 0
}
```

### Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```bash
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

And below is an example of what the data in a log file, 2018-11-12-events.json, looks like.

```json
{
  "artist": "The Killers",
  "auth": "Logged In",
  "firstName": "Jayden",
  "gender": "M",
  "itemInSession": 32,
  "lastName": "Graves",
  "length": 246.80444,
  "level": "paid",
  "location": "Marinette, WI-MI",
  "method": "PUT",
  "page": "NextSong",
  "registration": 1540664184796.0,
  "sessionId": 594,
  "song": "Read My Mind",
  "status": 200,
  "ts": 1542672042796,
  "userAgent": "\"Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 6.3; WOW64) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/36.0.1985.143 Safari/537.36\"",
  "userId": "25"
}
```

In order to read the json lines files from pandas:

```python
df = pd.read_json(filepath, lines=True)
```
